<<header |
  = Ocsigen platform installation
  <<outline depth="1">>
>>



==Preliminary notice==

Ocsigen is a set of software projects with some dependencies to some well-spread OCaml modules.

Many software distributions come with Ocsigen packages,
and the following compiling instructions should work with very few changes on most Unix systems (Linux, MacOS, FreeBSD ...).
* The standard way to install ocsigen packages is to use the Opam package manager.
* If your distribution does not provide binary packages for Ocsigen, kindly tell the packagers of the distribution that you need these packages.
* If you need to modify the compilation scripts or Makefiles for your needs, please contribute your changes, so that they benefit everybody.
* If you can't solve your installation problems after a few hours, send an email on the [[https://sympa.mancoosi.univ-paris-diderot.fr/wws/info/ocsigen|Ocsigen mailing list]]. Someone will probably help you!


==@@id="source"@@ Installation with Opam ==

If you want to compile Ocsigen packages, the recommended way is to use the [[http://opam.ocamlpro.com|OPAM]] package manager:

* Install the non-OCaml dependencies, for example, on debian:

{{{
sudo aptitude install libev-dev libgdbm-dev libncurses5-dev libpcre3-dev 
                      libssl-dev libsqlite3-dev libcairo-ocaml-dev m4
                      opam camlp4-extra
}}}

or on MacOS :
{{{
brew install ocaml opam libev gdbm pcre openssl pkg-config sqlite3
}}}
On MacOS, after installing sqlite3 and pkg-config, you need to tell pkg-config where is the sqlite3.pc file using
{{{
brew link --force sqlite3
}}}
<<| WAS:
sudo ln -s /usr/local/Cellar/sqlite/3.7.15.2/lib/pkgconfig/sqlite3.pc \
  /usr/local/lib/pkgconfig/sqlite3.pc
>>

* Just install opam and do {{{opam install eliom}}}. Be careful if you have several installations of OCaml on your system (not recommended)
* If you want to use the development version of Ocsigen (only for beta testers), pin the required github repositories on Opam (Former Ocsigen Opam repository is deprecated).


==@@id="binary"@@ Binary distribution ==

Ocsigen is available in some software distributions, e.g.:

* [[http://packages.qa.debian.org/e/eliom.html|Debian]]
* [[https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/ocsigen|Ubuntu]]

If your distribution has all the packages you need, this is probably
the simplest way to install Ocsigen software.
But be careful to install the last stable version available
on this Web site.
